Hi and welcome to this video on booleans where we start our deep dive looking at the boolean data type
in Python.
Now booleans are an integer subclass and so we'll cover that in detail in this video.
The bool class and the class is described in Pepp 285.
So if you're interested in that you can do a search on the web for Pepp 285 and it will show you kind
of the thinking and the thought process and the rationale behind the Boolean type in Python.
And it's really an interesting read.
I suggest you take a look at that if you're interested.
But will cover most of that in this video.
So Python has a concrete bulled class that is used to represent boolean values.
Now the bool class is a subclass of the in class so the rule class inherits from integers which means
that it possesses all the properties and the methods of integers such as addition subtraction that do
the math operators and so on.
And then also adds a few of its own like and or or.
So you can actually test this and there is a built in method to Python called a subclass that will check
to see whether a boolean where it will check to see whether a class is a subclass of another class.
So you just pass in the two types that you're interested in.
And in this case while it returns true since boolean is a subclass of int write it in Herods from now
two constants are defined in Python they're called true and false and they are instances of bool.
So you can use the built in method in Python called instance to check if a variable is an instance of
some type.
So in this case true is an instance of bool.
So this will return true.
Right so it will actually return itself.
But if we also look at this code here is instance true comma int.
Well since booleans are integers the subclass of integers while that will also return true now they
all singleton objects so what a singleton objects we've covered that before.
But just a quick reminder.
So true is nothing more than a label that points to some object in memory that is of bool type that
lives at some memory address and then has some internal value and its internal value is a integer of
value 1 and then false is the same thing.
Basically it's just an alias or a label that points to an object of type bool in memory and some memory
address which has an internal value of an 0.
So true is that same thing as the integer 1 and FALSE is the integer 0.
But of course it's got a little bit more than just one and 0 integers because they're booleans so they
have some extra functionality.
Now using is.
And equals equals.
If you remember from the earlier videos we had in the first section is is the identity operator that
we can use to compare memory addresses and equals equals compares more than numerical values.
So true and false are singleton objects which means that they retain the same memory address throughout
the lifetime of the application.
So true will be some memory address when your application starts up and it will stay at that memory
address the entire time of the program and will never change.
Whenever you use true it will always be a memory address and say thing were false.
So when you're comparing a boolean expression to True and False you can use either the is operation
or the equals equals operator.
So either the identity or the equality operator It doesn't matter which it's actually completely equivalent
and that's only because true is a singleton object and so forth.
And of course a has to be some kind of Boolean object.
So it might be a boolean expression like three less than four.
Well three less than four will return true.
Right.
That's that will evaluate to true.
And that true that gets returned from the expression three less than four is the same true as just the
constant.
True because it's a singleton object and therefore there's only one instance of it throughout the lifetime
of your code.
Now boolean objects are also integer objects and they just inherit from ints so they can also just be
interpreted as the integers 1 and 0.
If we look at end of truth so we can actually cast true to an end.
Right.
We can call the constructor of end and essentially cast true to an end while we get a one back which
is what we expect since True's internal value is an end of one and the same thing were false.
If we cast false to an end then we get zero.
But and this is really important to understand.
True and one are not the same objects right.
They have the same value but they are not the same objects true lives at some memory address and one
lives at some different memory address that not even the same types.
Right.
True is boolean.
One is int Yes boolean inherit from int but there are still not the same object.
So that's really important to understand because what it means is that the idea of true the memory address
of true is not the same as the memory address of one the same thing goes with false and zero they are
not the same objects.
The idea of fault is not the same thing as the id of 0 which means that if you were to write something
like this true is one.
Remember the is the identity operator checks the memory address will that will return therefore false
because while they're not the same objects that don't live at the same memory address on the other hand
if you use the quality operator.
True equals equals one that will return true because it is true right.
True is equal to one but it is not one.
So a distinction that has to be made and that you have to remember.
So though this whole thing can lead to a kind of strange maybe behavior that you may not expect and
it's this whole thing with the polymorphism that comes into play but you can write an expression like
true.
Greater than false.
Now I'm not saying that any of these expressions we're going to write here make a lot of sense or that
these are things you necessarily want to write in your code.
Most of the time you don't.
There are exceptions when it is useful and we'll see that later when we look at things like list comprehensions
and so on.
But for now these are probably you know code samples that you might shy away from in your own code but
they do work.
So true greater than false will return true.
Well because true is really one and false is also 0 right.
So one is greater than zero.
That is true.
You can also write this.
One equals equals two equals equals fault for that.
You know that kind of makes sense right.
That's that's a piece of code that you know looks fine.
What's going to happen.
One equals equals two is false.
Right.
One is not equal to two.
So we'll get a false result out of this expression here in the parentheses and false equals equals false.
Well we know that that is true.
But another way you could have written this is this way.
One equals equals two equals equals zero.
So that one really looks we have now.
I mean this is kind of a weird syntax but remember that 0 and false are kind of the same thing.
False is 0 for some extra functionality.
So in this case we'll also get true because one equals equals two is false which is 0 and 0 is equal
to zero.
So we get true.
Now the parentheses here are important then we'll see that in an upcoming video.
When we look at change operations and Python.
But they are important here and we'll explain why later section.
So in fact any integer operation will also work with booleans you know addition subtraction are the
the model you know and all those things.
So for example you could write true plus true plus true there that will return 3.
Again I don't necessarily are propose that you should write things like this in your code.
There are some actually use cases where this actually can be useful but we'll see those later.
You could also do this.
True plus true plus true parentheses Montu.
Well that's going to be three month two which is going to be one.
You can also write minus true negative true which is just negative 1.
Right.
So you can write these kinds of weird things you know a hundred times false with false zeros or a hundred
times zero will return 0 5 so you can do all these kinds of weird things.
Now the boolean constructor writes Does Boole and then we pass in a single parameter X..
And the way it's to find is that it will return TRUE right when X is true.
So if you pass in true or an expression that evaluates to true in this it will return true.
And if you pass in false it will return false.
So you might think that that's a pretty useless constructor.
That's the only thing it can do.
But not at all.
And the reason why this is actually very useful is because every class in Python implements something
called its truth value and its truth value is basically saying and asking a class if I were to ask you
how you would describe yourself as a boolean What would you say.
And each class implements that and it says well you know if I'm in this kind of state then I'm going
to say I'm in a true state and if I'm in this state I'm in a false state.
And that's that's basically how most of the classes and even the our own classes or custom classes that
we write We'll also have that property and we can actually define what that property should be and how
it should behave.
And we'll get into that in the section on object oriented programming.
But this is sometimes called the truth value of an object or the truthiness arm is used or so are quite
commonly to describe this.
And basically it's just what is the truth value of an object and will have an upcoming video that discusses
that in a lot more detail but integers have a truth that integers have truthiness and they do that according
to a very simple rule which is if the integer is 0 its truth value is false.
Right.
And so we say that 0 is falsie because it has a truth value or false and bhool of X is true for any
integer x other than 0.
And so we would say in this case that X is truth the one has a truth value of true 2 has a truth value
of two of truth and so on.
I will check in now and see some examples of that.
So Bullpup 0 is false.
So 0 is falsie bull of 1 is true.
1 is truthy a 100 will also return true negative 1 will also return true.
So don't fall into that trap.
Some languages will use negative one is false.
Not in Python.
False is zero.
And that's it.
Everything else is true.
We're talking about integers right.
So it's a very simple rule and it's the truth value of integers and then the next video will take a
look at how that actually works.
OK for now let's just switch to some code and take a look at all this in action.
So let's start by looking at the boolean class.
So bool is a class that's built in to Python and that supports boolean values.
Bool is actually a subclass of it.
So we can look at that by looking at this method here is subclassed and we can pass the classes that
we want to look at.
In particular we're going to want to know is bool a subclass of int and need to spell it correctly.
And the answer is true.
So bool is a subclass of int which means that bool inherits all the properties and methods of integers
and then adds its own as well.
It adds a few like for example and or X or and so on.
So there we also have built in values and here's this true here right.
True is actually a built in value it's a built in object built in.
Instance of bool of Python.
And so is false and there are singleton objects which means that throughout the lifetime of our program
the memory location where true and false live will never change.
It will always stay the same so it's very similar to what we saw with Singleton objects like none or
like interned strings in an earlier section so we can take a look at for example the type of true and
we'll look at the idea of true as well.
And we're also going to look at the integer value of true because since a boolean is an instance of
int it has an associated integer value.
Let's take a look at those three so that we can see the type of truth bool.
This is the memory address of true and this is the integer value that corresponds to true.
So true and one are very much interrelated.
We can do the same thing with false or we can look at the type of false we can look at the idea of false
and we can look at the integer value of false and there we go.
So false is a bold type.
The memory address of false is some memory address which of course is different than true and the integer
value that's associated with false is 0.
Now we can look at let's say the result of a boolean expression.
Let's say 3 is less than 4.
That is going to return a true or false.
In this case it returns true.
Now we can look at the idea.
Well first of all let's look at the type of three.
Less than four.
That's a ball right.
That's what we expect.
Those comparison expressions return a boolean value.
But if we look at the ID of 3 less than 4 you'll notice that that ID here is the same as the ID over
here.
The same memory address is the same object.
So what that means is that we can compare to a boolean values to boolean values using either the equality
operator that equals equals or the is operator which is the identity operate.
So it doesn't matter which one we use in this case because true and false are singletons.
So for example what I mean by that is we can look and say we can either say three is less than four
equals equals true.
Obviously that's kind of silly doing that.
But anyway let's try it.
And that returns true because true is equal to true.
But just as well we could say this none is.
There are three less than 4 is true.
That will also return true.
And this is the same way we might test for none.
For example we might say none is false and nung is indeed false and we'll get to what that is.
Later on so we have that and true and false are essentially just singleton classes so we can use either
is or equals equals It doesn't matter.
That's safe to do.
In either case and it's not like one really performs better than the other.
It's pretty much identical.
Now one other thing that we pointed out in the lecture was something like this.
One equals equals two equals equals false.
OK.
So this code what it's doing its first evaluating what's inside the parentheses precedence.
So one equals equals two.
Well that is false and is false equal to false.
Yeah absolutely.
That is correct.
We could have read or written it this way.
That would be the same thing.
False is false.
All the way back as equals equals.
Now one thing I want to point out is doing this will not work the same way.
We get false for a result and we'll get into this operate a chain in a later video or an upcoming video
on booleans.
But for now just be careful.
Right.
What's happening here is that it's not actually evaluating this nor is it even evaluating two equals
equals false equals equal to one.
It's doing something else it's actually doing.
One equals equals two and two equals equals false.
That's actually what it's doing.
Well we'll discuss that in a lot more detail in an upcoming video.
So be careful with chains but that's OK.
We'll deal with it later.
All right.
So the under lying integer values.
Let's get back to that a little bit of true and false are 1 and 0 respectively.
So because of polymorphous them really true and one and false and zero kind of behave in similar ways
true can either be a boolean in that context or it can be an event in another context.
And what I mean by that is for example let's say we take on one class.
True.
While here we're doing addition and.
Well true is also one writes a little bit like a chameleon.
It can be true or it can be one.
This case is one.
So one plus one is to write and we say the same thing like a hundred times false well false is zero.
So a 100 times zero is going to be zero.
In fact we can even do things like this.
True greater than false.
I'm not sure that I would ever write code like that but that will work since one is greater than zero.
That is actually technically true.
We also have even weirder things we can take may be true plus true plus true and we can mob those with
two.
So really what's happening here is that we have three month two.
And indeed we get one back get even to negative.
True as we saw in the slides we get negative 1 back.
So true and false can behave as booleans or they can behave as integers because remember at the end
of the day True and False are in fact integers.
They're just more specialized integers.
They have a few more things that we can do with booleans like an's and on so we can say true and false.
Right.
That's defined or true or false typewrite true or false.
OK.
So we have that now.
Lastly what I want to talk about is going from an end to a boolean so we can certainly do something
like this.
Rule zero.
So we can pass in zero and it's going to return false and same thing with ball 1.
That's going to return TRUE SO 0 will map back to false one will my back to true.
And of course end of true as we saw maps to 1 and into false maps to 0.
But what's happening here is it's a little subtle but we have a number of integers and we're passing
that to the Boolean constructors.
Now remember the boolean constructor what we said is that the boolean constructor will return true if
what's passed in is true.
But we didn't pass truing here.
Right.
We didn't do bhool of truth.
That's true as well.
And that's exactly what we would expect.
Same thing with bouillotte false.
Would expect that to return false because that's what the constructor does.
So how do we go from zero to false and from 1 to true.
Well we'll get into the details of that in the next video.
But for now let me also show you that bhool of let's say a hundred.
That's also true.
Bhool of negative 1.
The only time when we will get false is when we use 0.
And so this this kind of rule I will explain why it works and how it works in the next video.
But it basically says any number other than zero is going to evaluate to true.
It's going to have an associated truth value and that truth value will be true.
And the only time when it's false is when the value is zero.
We're not really converting an end to a bull.
We are looking at the truthiness of the truth value of a number and that is what we use then to generate
this view.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.